fExcerpted fromTHE GREEK MYTHS by Robert Graves_s____________________________________________________________________
THE PELASGIAN CREATION MYTH  
p, but  found nothing substantial for her feet to rest upon, and therefore divided the sea from the  sky, dancing lonely upon its waves. She danced towards the south, and the wind set in  motion behind her seemed something new and apart with which to begin a work of  creation. Wheeling about, she caught hold of this north wind, rubbed it between her  hands, and behold! the great serpent Ophion. Eurynome danced to warm herself, wildly  and more wildly, until Ophion, grown lustful, coiled about those divine limbs and was  moved to couple with her. Now, the North Wind, who is also called Boreas, fertilizes;  which is why mares often turn their hind-quarters to the wind and breed foals without aid  of a stallion. So Eurynome was likewise got with child.  
Next, she assumed the form of a dove, brooding on the waves and in due process  of time laid the Universal Egg. At her bidding, Ophion coiled seven times about this egg,  until it hatched and split in two. Out tumbled all things that exist, her children: sun,  moon, planets, stars, the earth with its mountains and rivers, its trees, herbs, and living  creatures.  
Eurynome and Ophion made their home upon Mount Olympus, where he vexed  her by claiming to be the author of the Universe. Forthwith she bruised his head with her  heel, kicked out his teeth, and banished him to the dark caves below the earth. Next, the  goddess created the seven planetary powers, setting a Titaness and a Titan over each.  Theia and Hyperion for the Sun; Phoebe and Atlas for the Moon; Dione and Crius  
for the planet Mars; Metis and Coeus for the planet Mercury; Themis and Eurymedon for  the planet Jupiter; Tethys and Oceanus for Venus; Rhea and Cronus for the planet Saturn.  But the first man was Pelasgus, ancestor of the Pelasgians; he sprang from the soil of  Arcadia, followed by certain others, whom he taught to make huts and feed upon acorns,  and sew pig—skin tunics such as poor folk still wear in Euboea and Phocis.  
THE OLYMPIAN CREATION MYTH 
AT the beginning of all things Mother Earth emerged from Chaos and bore her son  Uranus as she slept. Gazing down fondly at her from the mountains, he showered fertile  rain upon her secret clefts, and she bore grass, flowers, and trees, with the beasts and  birds proper to each. This same rain made the rivers flow and filled the hollow places  with water, so that lakes and seas came into being.  
Her first children of semi-human form were the hundred-handed giants Briareus,  Gyges, and Cottus. Next appeared the three wild, one-eyed Cyclopes, builders of gigantic  walls and master—smiths, formerly of Thrace, afterwards of Crete and Lycia, whose sons  Odysseus encountered in Sicily. Their names were Brontes, Steropes, and Arges, and  their ghosts have dwelt in the caverns of the volcano Aetna since Apollo killed them in  revenge for the death of Asclepius.  
The Libyans, however, claim that Garamas was born before the Hundred-handed  Ones and that, when he rose from the plain, he offered Mother Earth a sacrifice of the  sweet acorn. 
1 | Pa ge
THE CASTRATION OF URANUS 
URANUS fathered the Titans upon Mother Earth, after he had thrown his rebellious  sons, the Cyclopes, into Tartarus, a gloomy place in the Underworld, which lies as far  distant from the earth as the earth does from the sky; it would take a falling anvil nine  days to reach its bottom. In revenge, Mother Earth persuaded the Titans to attack their  father; and they did so, led by Cronus, the youngest of the seven, whom she armed with a  flint sickle. They surprised Uranus as he slept, and it was with the flint sickle that the  merciless Cronus castrated him, grasping his genitals with the left hand (which has ever  since been the hand of ill-omen) and afterwards throwing them, and the sickle too, into  the sea by Cape Drepanum. But drops of blood flowing from the wound fell upon Mother  Earth, and she bore the Three Erinnyes, furies who avenge crimes of parricide and  perjury — by name Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera. The nymphs of the ash-tree, called  the Meliae, also sprang from that blood.  
The Titans then released the Cyclopes from Tartarus, and awarded the sovereignty  of the earth to Cronus. However, no sooner did Cronus find himself in supreme command  than he confined the Cyclopes to Tartarus again together with the Hundred-handed Ones  and, taking his sister Rhea to wife, ruled in Elis.  
THE DETHRONEMENT OF CRONUS 
CRONUS married his sister Rhea, to whom the oak is sacred. But it was prophesied  by Mother Earth, and by his dying father Uranus, that one of his own sons would  dethrone him. Every year, therefore, he swallowed the children whom Rhea bore him:  first Hestia, then Demeter and Hera, then Hades, then Poseidon.  
Rhea was enraged. She bore Zeus, her third son, at dead of night on Mount  Lycaeum in Arcadia, where no creature casts a shadow and, having bathed him in the  River Neda, gave him to Mother Earth; by whom he was carried to Lyctos in Crete, and  hidden in the cave of Dicte on the Aegean Hill. Mother Earth left him there to be nursed  by the Ash-nymph Adrasteia and her sister Io, both daughters of Melisseus, and by the
Goat-nymph Amaltheia. His food was honey, and he drank Amaltheia's milk, with Goat Pan, his foster-brother. Zeus was grateful to these three nymphs for their kindness and,  when he became Lord of the Universe, set Amaltheia's image among the stars, as  Capricorn. He also borrowed one of her horns, which resembled a cow's, and gave it to  the daughters of Melisseus; it became the famous Cornucopia, or horn of plenty, which is  always filled with whatever food  
or drink its owner may desire. But some say that Zeus was suckled by a sow, and rode on  her back, and that he lost his navel-string at Omphalion near Cnossus.  Around the infant Zeus's golden cradle, which was hung upon a tree (so that  Cronus might find him neither in heaven, nor on earth, nor in the sea) stood the armed  Curetes, Rhea's sons. They clashed their spears against their shields, and shouted to  drown the noise of his wailing, lest Cronus might hear it from far off. For Rhea had  wrapped a stone in swaddling clothes, which she gave to Cronus on Mount Thaumasium  in Arcadia; he swallowed it, believing that he was swallowing the infant Zeus.  Nevertheless, Cronus got wind of what had happened and pursued Zeus, who transformed  himself into a serpent and his nurses into bears: hence the constellations of the Serpent  and the Bears.  
Zeus grew to manhood among the shepherds of Ida, occupying another cave; then 
2 | Pa ge
sought out Metis the Titaness, who lived beside the Ocean stream. On her advice he  visited his mother Rhea, and asked to be made Cronus's cup-bearer. Rhea readily assisted  him in his task of vengeance; she provided the emetic potion, which Metis had told him  to mix with Cronus's honeyed drink. Cronus, having drunk deep, vomited up first the  stone, and then Zeus's elder brothers and sisters. They sprang out unhurt and, in gratitude,  asked him to lead them in a war against the Titans, who chose the gigantic Atlas as their  leader; for Cronus was now past his prime.  
The war lasted ten years but, at last, Mother Earth prophesied victory to her  grandson Zeus, if he took as allies those whom Cronus had confined in Tartarus; so he  came secretly to Campe, the old jaileress of Tartarus, killed her, took her keys and,  having released the Cyclopes and the Hundred-handed Ones, strengthened them with  divine food and drink. The Cyclopes thereupon gave Zeus the thunderbolt as a weapon of  offence; and Hades, a helmet of darkness; and Poseidon, a trident. After the three  brothers had held a counsel of war, Hades entered unseen into Cronus's presence, to steal  his weapons; and, while Poseidon threatened him with the trident and thus diverted his  attention, Zeus struck him down with the thunderbolt. The three Hundred—handed Ones  now took up rocks and pelted the remaining Titans, and a sudden shout from Goat-Pan  put them to flight. The gods rushed in pursuit. Cronus, and all the defeated Titans, except  Atlas, were banished to a British island in the farthest west (or, some say, confined in  Tartarus), and guarded there by the Hundred-handed Ones; they never troubled Hellas  again. Atlas, as their war-leader, was awarded an exemplary punishment, being ordered  to carry the sky on his shoulders; but the Titanesses were spared, for the sake of Metis  and Rhea.  
Zeus himself set up at Delphi, the stone which Cronus had disgorged. It is still  there, constantly anointed with oil, and strands of unwoven wool are offered upon it.  Some say that Poseidon was neither eaten nor disgorged, but that Rhea gave  Cronus a foal to eat in his stead, and hid him among the horse herds. And the Cretans,  who are liars, relate that Zeus is born every year in the same cave with flashing fire and a  stream of blood; and that every year he dies and is buried.  
ZEUS AND METIS 
SOME Hellenes say that Athene had a father named Pallas, a winged goatish giant,  who later attempted to outrage her, and whose name she added to her own after stripping  him of his skin to make the aegis, and of his wings for her own shoulders; if, indeed, the  aegis was not the skin of Medusa the Gorgon, whom she flayed after Perseus had  decapitated her.  
Others say that her father was one Itonus, a king of Iton in Phthiotis, whose  daughter Iodama she killed by accidentally letting her see the Gorgon's head, and so  changing her into a block of stone, when she trespassed in the precinct at night.  
Still others say that Poseidon was her father, but that she disowned him and begged  to be adopted by Zeus, which he was glad to do.  
But Athene's own priests tell the following story of her birth Zeus lusted after Metis  the Titaness, who turned into many shapes to escape him until she was caught at last and  got with child. An oracle of Mother Earth then declared that this would be a girl-child  and that, if Metis conceived again, she would bear a son who was fated to depose Zeus,  just as Zeus had deposed Cronus, and Cronus had deposed Uranus. Therefore, having  coaxed Metis to a couch with honeyed words, Zeus suddenly opened his mouth and  swallowed her, and that was the end of Metis, though he claimed afterwards that she gave  him counsel from inside his belly. In due process of time, he was seized by a raging 

3 | Pa ge
headache as he walked by the shores of Lake Tritonis, so that his skull seemed about to  burst, and he howled for rage until the whole firmament echoed. Up ran Hermes, who at  once divined the cause of Zeus's discomfort. He persuaded Hephaestus, or some say  Prometheus, to fetch his wedge and beetle and make a breach in Zeus's skull, from which  Athene sprang, fully armed, with a mighty shout.  
ZEUS AND HERA 
ONLY Zeus, the Father of Heaven, might wield the thunderbolt; and it was with the  threat of its fatal flash that he controlled his quarrelsome and rebellious family of Mount  Olympus. He also ordered the heavenly bodies, made laws, enforced oaths, and  pronounced oracles. When his mother Rhea, foreseeing what trouble his lust would  cause, forbade him to marry, he angrily threatened to violate her. Though she at once  turned into a serpent, this did not daunt Zeus, who be		came a male serpent and, twining  about her in an indissoluble knot, made good his threat. It was then that he began his long  series of adventures in love. He fathered the Seasons and the Three Fates on Themis; the  Charites on Eurynome; the Three Muses on Mnemosyne, with whom he lay for nine  nights; and, some say, Persephone, the Queen of the Underworld, whom his brother  Hades forcibly married, on the nymph Styx.  
Thus he lacked no power either above or below earth; and his wife Hera was equal  to him in one thing alone: that she could still bestow the gift of prophecy on any man or  beast she pleased.  
Zeus and Hera bickered constantly. Vexed by his infidelities, she often humiliated  him by her scheming ways. Though he would confide his secrets to her, and sometimes  accept her advice, he never fully trusted Hera, and she knew that if offended beyond a  certain point he would flog or even hurl a thunderbolt at her. She therefore resorted to  ruthless intrigue, as in the matter of Heracles's birth; and sometimes borrowed  Aphrodite's girdle, to excite his passion and thus weaken his will.  
A time came when Zeus's pride and petulance became so intolerable that Hera,  Poseidon, Apollo, and all the other Olympians, except Hestia, surrounded him suddenly  as he lay asleep on his couch and bound him with rawhide thongs, knotted into a hundred  knots, so that he could not move. He threatened them with instant death, but they had  placed his fry thunderbolt out of reach and laughed insultingly at him. While they were  celebrating their victory, and jealously discussing who was to be his successor, Thetis the  Nereid, foreseeing a civil war on Olympus, hurried in search of the hundred—handed  Briareus, who swiftly untied the thongs, using every hand at once, and released his  master. Because it was Hera who had led the conspiracy against him, Zeus hung her up  from the sky with a golden bracelet about either wrist and an anvil fastened to either  ankle. The other deifies were vexed beyond words, but dared attempt no rescue for all her  piteous cries. In the end Zeus undertook to free her if they swore never more to rebel  against him; and this each in turn grudgingly did. Zeus punished Poseidon and Apollo by  sending them as bond-servants to King Laomedon, for whom they built the city of Troy;  but he pardoned the others as having acted under duress.  
HERA AND HER CHILDREN 
HERA, daughter of Cronus and Rhea, having been born on the island of Samos or,  some say, at Argos, was brought up in Arcadia by Temenus, son of Pelasgus. The  Seasons were her nurses. After banishing their father Cronus, Hera's twin-brother Zeus 
4 | Pa ge
sought her out at Cnossus in Crete or, some say, on Mount Thornax (now called Cuckoo  Mountain) in Argolis, where he courted her, at first unsuccessfully. She took pity on him  only when he adopted the disguise of a bedraggled cuckoo, and tenderly warmed him in  her bosom. There he at once resumed his true shape and ravished her, so that she was  shamed into marrying him.  
All the gods brought gifts to the wedding; notably Mother Earth gave Hera a tree  with golden apples, which was later guarded by the Hesperides in Hera's orchard on  Mount Atlas. She and Zeus spent their wedding night on Samos, and it lasted three  hundred years. Hera bathes regularly in the spring of Canathus, near Argos, and thus  renews her virginity.  
To Hera and Zeus were born the deities Ares, Hephaestus, and Hebe, though some  say that Ares and his twin—sister Eris were conceived when Hera touched a certain  flower, and Hebe when she touched a lettuce, and that Hephaestus also was her  parthenogenous child - a wonder which he would not believe until he had imprisoned her  in a mechanical chair with arms that folded about the sitter, thus forcing her to swear by  the River Styx that she did not lie. Others say that Hephaestus was her son by Talos, the  nephew of Daedalus. 
POSEIDON’S NATURE AND D
EEDS 
WHEN Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades, after deposing their father Cronus, shook lots in a  helmet for the lordship of the sky, sea, and murky underworld, leaving the earth common  to all, Zeus won the sky, Hades the underworld, and Poseidon the sea. Poseidon, who is  equal to his brother Zeus in dignity, though not in power, and of a surely quarrelsome  nature, at once set about building his underwater palace off Aegae in Euboea. In its  spacious stables he keeps white chariot horses with brazen hooves and golden manes, and  a golden chariot at the approach of which storms instantly cease and sea-monsters rise,  frisking, around it.  
 Needing a wife who would be at home in the sea—depths, he courted Thetis the  Nereid; but when it was prophesied by Themis that any son born to Thetis would be  greater than his father, he desisted, and allowed her to marry a mortal named Peleus.  Amphitrite, another Nereid, whom he next approached, viewed his advances with  repugnance, and fled to the Atlas Mountains to escape him; but he sent messengers after  her, among them one Delphinus, who pleaded Poseidon's cause so winningly that she  yielded, and asked him to arrange the marriage. G ratefully, Poseidon set Delphinus's  image among the stars as a constellation, the Dolphin. Amphitrite bore Poseidon three  children: Triton, Rhode, and Benthesicyme; but he caused her almost as much jealousy as  Zeus did Hera by his love affairs with goddesses, nymphs, and mortals. Especially she  loathed his infatuation with Scylla, daughter of Phorcys, whom she changed into a  barking monster with six heads and twelve feet by throwing magical herbs into her  bathing pool.  
Poseidon is greedy of earthly kingdoms, and once claimed possession of Attica by  thrusting his trident into the acropolis at Athens, where a well of sea—water immediately  gushed out and is still to be seen; when the South Wind blows you may hear the sound of  the sea far below. Later, during the reign of Cecrops, Athene came and took possession in  a gentler manner, by planting the first olive—tree beside the well. Poseidon, in a fury,  challenged her to single combat, an Athene would have accepted had not Zeus interposed  and ordered them to submit the dispute to arbitration. Presently, then, they appeared  before a divine court, consisting of their supernal fellow—deities who called on Cecrops 
5 | Pa ge
to give evidence. Zeus himself expressed opinion, but while all the other gods supported  Poseidon, all the goddesses supported Athene. Thus, by a majority of one, the court ruled  that Athene had the better right to the land, because she had given the better gift.  
Greatly vexed, Poseidon sent huge waves to flood the Thriasian Plain, where  Athene's city of Athenae stood, whereupon she took her abode in Athens instead, and  called that too after herself. However, to appease Poseidon's wrath, the women of Athens  were deprived of their vote, and the men forbidden to bear their mothers' names hitherto.  
Poseidon also disputed Troezen with Athene; and on this occasion Zeus issued an  order for the city to be shared equally between them, an arrangement disagreeable to  both. Next, he tried unsuccessfully to claim Aegina from Zeus, and Naxos from  Dionysus; and in a claim for Corinth with Helius received the Isthmus only, while Helius  was awarded the Acropolis. In fury, he tried to seize Argolis from Hera, was again ready  to fight, refusing to appear before his Olympian peers who, he said, were prejudiced  against him. Zeus, therefore, referred the matter to the River-gods Inachus, Cephissus,  and Asterion, who judged in Hera's favour. Since he had been forbidden to revenge  himself with a flood as before, he did exactly the opposite: he dried up judges' streams so  that they now never flow in summer.  
However, the sake of Amymone, one of the Danaids who were distressed by the  drought, he caused the Argive river of, Lerna to flow perpetually.  He boasts of having created the horse, though some say that, when he was newly  born, Rhea gave one to Cronus to eat; and of having invented the bridle, though Athene  had done so before him; but his claim to have instituted horse-racing is not disputed.  Certainly, horses are sacred to him, perhaps because of his amorous pursuit of Demeter  when she was tearfully seeking her daughter Persephone. It is said that Demeter, wearied  and disheartened by her search, and disinclined for passionate dalliance with any god or  Titan, transformed herself into a mare, and began to graze with the herd of one Oncus, a  son of Apollo's who reigned in Arcadian Onceium. She did not, however, deceived  Poseidon, who transformed himself into a stallion and covered her, from which  outrageous union sprang the nymph Despoena and the wild horse Arion. Demeter's anger  was so hot that she is still worshipped locally as 'Demeter the Fury'.  
HERMES’ NATURE AND DEEDS 
WHEN Hermes was born on Mount Cyllene his mother Maia laid him in swaddling  bands on a  winnowing fan, but he grew with astonishing quickness into a little boy, and  as soon as her back was turned slipped off and went looking for adventure. Arrived at  Pieria, where Apollo was tending a fine herd of cows, he decided to steal them. But,  fearing to be betrayed by their tracks, he quickly made a number of shoes from the bark  of a fallen oak and tied them with plaited grass to the feet of the cows, which he then  drove off by night along the road.  
Apollo discovered the loss, but Hermes’s trick deceived him, and though he went as  far as Pylus in his westward search, and to Onchestus in his eastern, he was forced, in the  end, to offer a reward for the apprehension of the thief. Silenus and his satyrs, greedy of  reward, spread out in different directions to track him down but, for a long while, without  success. At last, as a party of them passed through Arcadia, they heard the muffled sound  of music such as they had never heard before, and the nymph Cyllene, from the mouth of  a cave, told them that a most gifted child had recently been born there, to whom she was  acting as nurse: he had constructed an ingenious musical toy from the shell of a tortoise  and some cow-gut, with which he had lulled his mother to sleep.  
‘And from whom did he get the cow-gut?’ asked the alert satyrs, noticing two 
6 | Pa ge
hides stretched outside the cave. ‘Do you charge the poor child with theft?’ asked  Cyllene. Harsh words were exchanged.  
At that moment Apollo came up, having discovered the thief’s identity by  observing the suspicious behaviour of a long-winged bird entering the cave, he awakened  Maia and told her severely that Hermes must restore the stolen cows. Maia pointed to the  child, still wrapped in his swaddling bands and feigning sleep. ‘What an absurd charge  she cried. But Apollo had already recognized the bands. He picked Hermes, carried him  to Olympus, and there formally accused him theft, offering the bands as evidence. Zeus,  loathing to believe that his own new-born son was a thief, encouraged him to plead not  guilty, but Apollo would not be put off and Hermes, at last, weakened confessed.  
‘Very well, come with me,’ he said, ‘and you may have your herd. I slaughtered  only two, and those I cut up into twelve equal portions as a sacrifice to the twelve gods.’  ‘Twelve gods?’ asked Apollo. ‘Who is the twelfth?’  
‘Your servant, sir,’ replied Hermes modestly. ‘l ate no more than my share, though  I was very hungry, and duly burned the rest.’  
Now, this was the first flesh-sacrifice ever made. The two gods returned to Mount  Cyllene, where Hermes greet his mother and retrieved something that he had been hidden  underneath sheepskin.  
‘What have you there?’ asked Apollo.  
In answer, Hermes showed his newly-invented tortoise-shell lyre and played such a  ravishing tune on it with the plectrum he had also invented, at the same time singing in  praise of Apollo’s nobility, intelligence, and generosity, that he was forgiven at once. He  led then surprised and delighted Apollo to Pylus, playing all the way, there gave him the  remainder of the cattle, which he had hidden it cave.  
‘A bargain!’ cried Apollo. ‘You keep the cows, and I take the lyre.”  ‘Agreed,’ said Hermes, and they shook hands on at.  
While the hungry cows were grazing, Hermes cut reeds, made them into a  shepherd’s pipe, and played another tune. Apollo, again delighted, cried: ‘A bargain! If  you give me that pipe, I will give you this golden staff with which I herd my cattle; in  future you shall be the god of all herdsmen and shepherds.’  
‘My pipe is worth more than your staff,’ replied Hermes. ‘But I will make the  exchange, if you teach me augury too, because it seems to be a most useful art.’  ‘I cannot do that,’ Apollo said, ‘but if you go to my old nurses, the Thriae who live  on Parnassus, they will teach you how to divine from pebbles.’  
They again shook hands and Apollo, taking the child back to Olympus, told Zeus  all that had happened. Zeus warned Hermes that henceforth he must respect the rights of  property and refrain from telling downright lies; but he could not help being amused.  
‘You seem to be a very ingenious, eloquent, and persuasive godling,’ he said.  ‘Then make me your herald, Father,’ Hermes answered, ‘and I will be responsible  for the safety of all divine property, and never tell lies, though I cannot promise always to  tell the whole truth.’  
‘That would not be expected of you,’ said Zeus, with a smile. ‘But your duties  would include the making of treaties, the promotion of commerce, and the maintenance  of free rights of way for travellers on any road m the world.’ When Hermes agreed to  these conditions, Zeus gave him a herald’s staff with white ribbons, which everyone was  ordered to respect; a round hat against the rain, and winged golden sandals which carried  him about with the swiftness of wind. He was at once welcomed to the Olympian family,  whom he taught the art of making fire by the rapid twirling of the fire-stick.  
Afterwards, the Thriae showed Hermes how to foretell the future from the dance of  pebbles in a basin of water; and he himself invented both the game of knuckle-bones and 
7 | Pa ge
the art of divining by them. Hades also engaged him as his herald, to summon the dying  gently and eloquently, by laying the golden staff upon their eyes.   He then assisted the Three Fates in the composition of the Alphabet, invented  astronomy, the musical scale, the arts of boxing and gymnastics, weights and measures  (which some attribute to Palamedes), and the cultivation of the olive-tree.  Some hold that the lyre invented by Hermes had seven strings; others, that it had  three only, to correspond with the seasons, or four to correspond with the quarters of the  year, and that Apollo brought the number up to seven.  
Hermes had numerous sons, including Echion the Argonauts’ herald; Autolycus  the thief; and Daphnis the inventor of bucolic poetry. This Daphnis was a beautiful  Sicilian youth whom his mother, a nymph, exposed in a laurel grove on the Mountain of  Hera; hence the name given him by the shepherds, his foster parents. Pan taught him to  play the pipes; he was beloved by Apollo, and used to hunt with Artemis, who took  pleasure in his music. He lavished great care on his many herds of cattle, which were of  the same stock as Helius’s. A nymph named Nomia made him swear never to be  unfaithful to her, on pain of being blinded; but her rival, Chimaera, contrived to seduce  him when he was drunk, and Nomia blinded him in fulfilment of her threat. Daphnis  consoled himself for a while with sad lays about the loss of sight, but he did not live long.  Hermes turned him into a stone, which is still shown at the city of Cephalenitanum; and  caused a fountain called Daphnis to gush up at Syracuse, where annual sacrifices are  offered.
APHRODITE’S NATURE AND DEEDS 
APHRODITE could seldom be persuaded to lend the other goddesses her magic girdle  which made everyone fall in love with its wearer; for she was jealous of her position.  Zeus had given her in marriage to Hephaestus, the lame Smith-god; but the true father of  the three children with whom she presented him—Phobus, Deimus, and Harmonia—was  Ares, the straight-limbed, impetuous, drunken, and quarrelsome God of War. Hephaestus  knew nothing of the deception until, one night, the lovers stayed too long together in bed  at Ares’s Thracian palace; then Helius, as he rose, saw them at their sport and told tales to  Hephaestus.  
Hephaestus angrily retired to his forge, and hammered out a bronze hunting-net, as  free as gossamer but quite unbreakable, which he secretly attached to the posts and sides  of his marriage-bed. He told Aphrodite who returned from Thrace, all smiles, explaining  that she had been away on business at Corinth: ‘Pray excuse me, dear wife, I am taking a  short holiday on Lemnos, my favourite island.’ Aphrodite did not offer to accompany  him and, when he was out of sight, sent hurriedly for Ares, who soon arrived. The two  went merrily to bed but, at dawn, found themselves entangled in the net, naked and  unable to escape. Hephaestus,  
turning back from his journey, surprised them there, and summoned all the gods to  witness his dishonour. He then announced that he would not release his wife until the  valuable marriage- gifts which he had paid her adoptive father, Zeus, were restored to  him.  
Up ran the gods, to watch Aphrodite’s embarrassment; but the goddesses, from a  sense of delicacy, stayed in their houses. Apollo, nudging Hermes, asked: ‘You would  not mind being in Ares’s position, would you, net and all?’ Hermes swore by his own  head, that he would not, even if there were three times as many nets, and all the  goddesses were looking on with disapproval. At this, both gods laughed uproariously, but  Zeus was so disgusted that he refused to hand back the marriage-gifts, or to interfere in a 
8 | Pa ge
vulgar dispute between a husband and wife, declaring that Hephaestus was a fool to have  made the affair public. Poseidon who, at sight of Aphrodite’s naked body, had fallen in  love with her, concealed his jealousy of Ares, and pretended to sympathize with  Hephaestus. ‘Since Zeus refuses to help,’ he said, ‘I will undertake that Ares, as a fee for  his release, pays the equivalent of the marriage-gifts in question.’ ‘That is all very well,’  
Hephaestus replied gloomily. ‘But if Ares defaults, you will have to take his place under  the net.’ ‘In Aphrodite’s company?’ Apollo asked, laughing. ‘I cannot think that Ares  will default,’ Poseidon said nobly. ‘But if he should do so, I am ready to pay the debt and  marry Aphrodite myself.’ So Ares was set at liberty, and returned to Thrace; and  Aphrodite went to Paphos, where she renewed her virginity in the sea.  
Flattered by Hermes’s frank confession of his love for her, Aphrodite presently  spent a night with him, the fruit of which was Hermaphroditus, a double-sexed being;  and, equally pleased by Poseidon’s intervention on her behalf, she bore him two sons,  Rhodus and Herophilus. Needless to say, Ares defaulted, pleading that if Zeus would not  pay, why should he? In the end, nobody paid, because Hephaestus was madly in love  with Aphrodite and had no real intention of divorcing her.  
 Later, Aphrodite yielded to Dionysus, and bore him Priapus; an ugly child with  enormous genitals—it was Hera who had given him this obscene appearance, in  disapproval of Aphrodite’s promiscuity. He is a gardener and carries a pruning-knife.  
Though Zeus never lay with his adopted daughter Aphrodite, as some say that he  did, the magic of her girdle put him under constant temptation, and at last he decided to  humiliate her by making her fall desperately in love with a mortal. This was the  handsome Anchises, King of the Dardanians, a grandson of Ilus and, one night, when he  was asleep in his herdsman’s hut on Trojan Mount Ida, Aphrodite visited him in the guise  of a Phrygian princess, clad in a dazzlingly red robe, and lay with him on a couch spread  with the skins of bears and lions, while bees buzzed drowsily about them. When they  parted at dawn, she revealed her identity, and made him promise not to tell anyone that  she had slept with him. Anchises was horrified to learn that he had uncovered the  nakedness of a goddess, and begged her to spare his life. She assured him that he had  nothing to fear, and that their son would be famous. Some days later, while Anchises was  drinking with his companions, one of them asked: ‘Would you not rather sleep with the  daughter of So-and-so than with Aphrodite herself?’ ‘No,’ he replied unguardedly.  ‘Having slept with both, I find the question inept.’  
 Zeus overheard this boast, and threw a thunderbolt at Anchises, which would have  killed him outright, had not Aphrodite interposed her girdle, and thus diverted the bolt  into the ground at his feet. Nevertheless, the shock so weakened Anchises that he could  never stand upright again, and Aphrodite, after bearing his son Aeneas, soon lost her  passion for him.  
One day, the wife of King Cinyras the Cyprian—but some call him King Phoenix  of Byblus, and some King Theias the Assyrian—foolishly boasted that her daughter  Smyrna was more beautiful even than Aphrodite. The goddess avenged this insult by  making Smyrna fall in love with her father  and climb into his bed one dark night, when  her nurse had made him too drunk to realize what he was doing. Later, Cinyras  discovered that he was both the father and grandfather of Smyrna’s unborn child and,  wild with wrath, seized a sword and chased her from the palace. He overtook her on the  brow of a hill, but Aphrodite hurriedly changed Smyrna into a myrrh-tree, which the  descending sword split in halves. Out tumbled the infant Adonis. Aphrodite, already  repenting of the mischief that she had made, concealed Adonis in a chest, which she  entrusted to Persephone, Queen of the Dead, asking her to stow it away in a dark place.  
Persephone had the curiosity to open there chest, and found Adonis inside. He was 
9 | Pa ge
so lovely that she lifted him out and brought him up in her own palace. The news reached  Aphrodite, who at once visited Tartarus to claim Adonis; and when Persephone would  not assent, having by now made him her lover, she appealed to Zeus. Zeus, well aware  that Aphrodite also wanted to lie with Adonis, refused to judge so unsavoury a dispute;  and transferred it to a lower court, presided over by the Muse Calliope. Calliope’s verdict  was that Persephone and Aphrodite had equal claims on Adonis—Aphrodite for  arranging his birth, Persephone for rescuing him from the chest—but that he should be  allowed a brief annual holiday from the amorous demands of both these insatiable  goddesses. She therefore divided the year into three equal parts, of which he was to spend  one with Persephone, one with Aphrodite, and the third by himself. Aphrodite did not  play fair: by wearing her magic girdle all the time, she persuaded Adonis to give her his  own share of the year, grudge the share due to Persephone, and disobey the court-order.  
Persephone, justly aggrieved, went to Thrace, where she told her benefactor Ares  that Aphrodite now preferred Adonis to himself. ‘A mere mortal,’ she cried, ‘and  effeminate at that!’ Ares grew jealous and, disguised as a wild boar, rushed at Adonis  who was out hunting on Mount Lebanon, and gored him to death before Aphrodite’s  eyes. Anemones sprang from his blood, and his soul descended to Tartarus. Aphrodite  went tearfully to Zeus, and pleaded that Adonis should not have to spend more than the  gloomier half of the year with Persephone, but might be her companion for the summer  months. This Zeus magnanimously granted. But some say that Apollo was the boar, and  revenged himself for an injury Aphrodite had done him.  
Once, to make Adonis jealous, Aphrodite spent several nights at Lilybaeum with  Butes the Argonaut; and by him became the mother of Eryx, a king of Sicily. Her  children by Adonis were one son, Golgos, founder of Cyprian Golgi, and a daughter,  Beroë, founder of Beroea in Thrace; and some say that Adonis, not Dionysus, was the  father of her son Priapus.  
The Fates assigned to Aphrodite one divine duty only, namely to make love; but  one day, Athene catching her surreptitiously at work on a loom, complained that her own  prerogatives had been infringed and threatened to abandon them altogether. Aphrodite  apologized profusely, and has never done a hand’s turn of work since.  
ARES’ NATURE AND DEEDS 
ARES loves battle for its own sake, and his sister Eris is always stirring up occasions for  war by the spread of rumour and the inculcation of jealousy. Like her, he never favours  one city or party more than another, but fights on this side or that, as inclination prompts  him, delighting in the slaughter of men and the sacking of towns. All his fellow immortals hate him, from Zeus and Hera downwards, except Eris, and Aphrodite who  nurses a perverse passion for him, and greedy Hades who welcomes the bold young  fighting-men slain in cruel wars.  
Ares has not been consistently victorious. Athene, a much more skilful fighter than  he, has twice worsted him in battle; and once, the gigantic sons of Aloeus conquered and  kept him imprisoned in a brazen vessel for thirteen months until, half dead, he was  released by Hermes; and, on another occasion, Heracles sent him running in fear back to  Olympus. He professes too deep a contempt for litigation ever to appear in court as a  plaintiff, and has only once done so as a defendant: that was when his fellow-deities  charged him with the wilful murder of Poseidon’s son Halirrhothius. He pleaded  justification, claiming to have saved his daughter Alcippe, of the House of Cecrops, from  being violated by the said Halirrhothius. Since no one had witnessed the incident, except  Ares himself, and Alcippe, who naturally confirmed her father’s evidence, the court 
10 | Pa ge
acquitted him. This was the first judgement ever pronounced in a murder trial; and the  hill on which the proceedings took place became known as the Areiopagus, a name it still  bears.  
HESTIA’S NATURE AND DEEDS 
IT is Hestia’s glory that, alone of the great Olympians, she never takes part in  wars or  
disputes. Like Artemis and Athene, moreover, she has always resisted every  amorous  
invitation offered her by gods, Titans, or others; for, after the dethronement of  Cronus, when Poseidon and Apollo came forward as rival suitors, she swore by  Zeus’s head to remain a virgin forever. At that, Zeus gratefully awarded her the  first victim of every public sacrifice, because she had preserved the peace of  Olympus.  
Drunken Priapus once tried to violate her at a rustic feast attended by  accident or in  
token of mourning, it is kindled afresh with the aid of a fire-wheel.  
APOLLO’S NATURE AND DEEDS 
APOLLO, Zeus’s son by Leto, was a seven-months’ child, but gods grow up swiftly.  Themis fed him on nectar and ambrosia, and when the fourth day dawned he called for  bow and arrows, with which Hephaestus at once provided him. On leaving Delos he  made straight for Mount Parnassus, where the serpent Python, his mother’s enemy, was  lurking; and wounded him severely with arrows. Python fled to the Oracle of Mother  Earth at Delphi, a city so named in honour of the monster Delphyne, his mate; but Apollo  dared follow him into the shrine, and there despatched him beside the sacred chasm.  
Mother Earth reported this outrage to Zeus, who not only ordered Apollo to visit  Tempe for purification, but instituted the Pythian Games, in honour of Python, over  which he was to preside penitentially. Quite unabashed, Apollo disregarded Zeus’s  command to visit Tempe. Instead, he went to Aigialae for purification, accompanied by  Artemis; and then, disliking the place, sailed to Tarrha in Crete, where King Carmanor  performed the ceremony.  
 On his return to Greece, Apollo sought out Pan, the disreputable old goat-legged  Arcadian god and, having coaxed him to reveal the art of prophecy, seized the Delphic  Oracle and retained its priestess, called the Pythoness, in his own service. Leto, on  hearing the news, came with Artemis to Delphi, where she turned aside to perform some  private rite in a sacred grove. The giant Tityus interrupted her devotions, and was trying  to violate her, when Apollo and Artemis, hearing screams, ran up and killed him with a  volley of arrows—a vengeance which Zeus, Tityus’s father, was pleased to consider a  pious one. In Tartarus, Tityus was stretched out for torment, his arms and legs securely  pegged to the ground; the area covered was no less than nine acres, and two vultures ate  his liver.  
Next, Apollo killed the satyr Marsyas, a follower of the goddess Cybele. This was  how it came about. One day, Athene made a double flute from stag’s bones, and played  on it at a banquet of the gods. She could not understand, at first, why Hera and Aphrodite  were laughing silently behind their hands, although her music seemed to delight the other  deities; she therefore went away by herself into a Phrygian wood, took up the flute again 
11 | Pa ge
beside a stream, and watched her image in the water, as she played. Realizing at once  how ludicrous that bluish face and those swollen cheeks made her look, she threw down  the flute, and laid a curse on anyone who picked it up.  
Marsyas was the innocent victim of this curse. He stumbled upon the flute, which  he had no sooner put to his lips than it played of itself, inspired by the memory of  Athene’s music; and he went about Phrygia in Cybele’s train, delighting the ignorant  peasants. They cried out that Apollo himself could not have made better music, even on  his lyre, and Marsyas was foolish enough not to contradict them. This, of course,  provoked the anger of Apollo, who invited him to a contest, the winner of which should  inflict whatever punishment he pleased on the loser. Marsyas consented, and Apollo  empanelled the Muses as a jury. The contest proved an equal one, the Muses being  charmed by both instruments, until Apollo cried out to Marsyas: ‘I challenge you to do  with your instrument as much as I can do with mine. Turn it upside down, and both play  and sing at the same time.’  
This, with a flute, was manifestly impossible, and Marsyas failed to meet the  challenge. But Apollo reversed his lyre and sang such delightful hymns in honour of the  Olympian gods that the Muses could not do less than give the verdict in his favour. Then,  for all his pretended sweetness, Apollo took a most cruel revenge on Marsyas: flaring  him alive and nailing his skin to a pine (or, some say. to a plane-tree). It now hangs in the  cavern whence the Marsyas River rises.  
Afterwards, Apollo won a second musical contest, at which King Midas presided;  this time he beat Pan. Becoming the acknowledged god of Music, he has ever since  played on his seven-stringed lyre while the gods banquet. Another of his duties was once  to guard the herds and flocks which the gods kept in Pieria; but he later delegated this  task to Hermes.  
Though Apollo refuses to bind himself in marriage, he has got many nymphs and  mortal women with child; among them, Phthia, on whom he fathered Dorus and his  brothers; and Thalia the Muse, on whom he fathered the Corybantes; and Coronis, on  whom he fathered Asclepius; and Aria, on whom he fathered Miletus; and Cyrene, on  whom he fathered Aristaeus.  
He also seduced the nymph Dryope, who was tending her father’s flocks on Mount  Oeta in the company of her friends, the Hamadryads. Apollo disguised himself as a  tortoise, with which they all played and, when Dryope put him into her bosom, he turned  into a hissing serpent, scared away the Hamadryads, and enjoyed her. She bore him  Amphissus, who founded the city of Oeta and built a temple to his father; there Dryope  served as priestess until, one day, the Hamadryads stole her away, and left a poplar in her  place.  
Apollo was not invariably successful in love. On one occasion he tried to steal  Marpessa from Idas, but she remained true to her husband. On another, he pursued  Daphne, the mountain nymph, a priestess of Mother Earth, daughter of the river Peneius  in Thessaly; but when he overtook her, she cried out to Mother Earth who, in the nick of  time, spirited her away to Crete, where she became known as Pasiphaë. Mother Earth left  
a laurel-tree in her place, and from its leaves Apollo made a wreath to console himself.  His attempt onDaphne, it must be added, was no sudden impulse. He had long been  in love with her, and had brought about the death of his rival, Leucippus, son of  Oenomaus, who disguised himself as a girl and joined Daphne’s mountain revels. Apollo,  knowing of this by divination, advised the mountain nymphs to bathe naked, and thus  make sure that everyone in their company was a woman; Leucippus’s imposture was at  once discovered, and the nymphs tore him to pieces.  
There was also the case of the beautiful youth Hyacinthus, a Spartan prince, with 
12 | Pa ge
whom not only the poet Thamyris fell in love—the first man who ever wooed one of his  own sex—but Apollo himself, the first god to do so. Apollo did not find Thamyris a  serious rival; having overheard his boast that he could surpass the Muses in song, he  maliciously reported it to them, and they at once robbed Thamyris of his sight, his voice,  and his memory for harping. But the West Wind had also taken a fancy to Hyacinthus,  and became, insanely jealous of Apollo, who was one day teaching the boy how to hurl a  discus, when the West Wind caught it in mid-air, dashed it against Hyacinthus’s skull,  and killed him. From his blood sprang the hyacinth flower, on which his initial letters are  still to be traced.  
 Apollo earned Zeus’s anger only once after the famous conspiracy to dethrone him.  This was when his son Asclepius, the physician, had the temerity to resurrect a dead man,  and thus rob Hades of a subject; Hades naturally lodged a complaint on Olympus, Zeus  killed Asclepius with a thunderbolt, and Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclopes. Zeus was  enraged at the loss of his armourers, and would have banished Apollo to Tartarus for  ever, had not Leto pleaded for his forgiveness and undertaken that he would mend his  ways. The sentence was reduced to one year’s hard labour, which Apollo was to serve in  the sheep-folds of King Admetus of Pherae. Obeying Leto’s advice, Apollo not only  carried out the sentence humbly, but conferred great benefits on Admetus.  
Having learned his lesson, he thereafter preached moderation in all things: the  phrases ‘Know thyself!’ and ‘Nothing in excess’ were always on his lips. He brought the  Muses down from their home on Mount Helicon to Delphi, tamed their wild frenzy, and  led them in formal and decorous dances.  
ARTEMIS’ NATURE AND DEEDS 
ARTEMIS, Apollo’s sister, goes armed with bow and arrows and, like him, has the  power both to send plagues or sudden death among mortals, and to heal them. She is the  protectress of little children, and of all sucking animals, but she also loves the chase,  especially that of stags.  
One day, while she was still a three-year-old child, her father Zeus, on whose knee  she was sitting, asked her what presents she would like. Artemis answered at once: ‘Pray  give me eternal virginity; as many names as my brother Apollo; a bow and arrows like  his; the office of bringing light; a saffron hunting tunic with a red hem reaching to my  knees; sixty young ocean nymphs, all of the same age, as my maids of honour; twenty  river nymphs from Amnisus in Crete, to take care of my buskins and feed my hounds  when I am not out shooting; all the mountains in the world; and, lastly, any city you care  to choose for me, but one will be enough, because I intend to live on mountains most of  the time. Unfortunately, women in labour will often be invoking me, since my mother  Leto carried and bore me without pains, and the Fates have therefore made me patroness  of childbirth.’  
She stretched up for Zeus’s beard, and he smiled proudly, saying: ‘With children  like you, I need not fear Hera’s jealous anger! You shall have all this, and more besides:  not one, but thirty cities, and a share in many others, both on the mainland and in the  archipelago; and I appoint you guardian of their roads and harbours.’  
Artemis thanked him, sprang from his knee, and went first to Mount Leucus in  Crete, and next to the Ocean stream, where she chose numerous nine-year-old nymphs  for her attendants; their mothers were delighted to let them go. On Hephaestus’s  invitation, she then visited the Cyclopes on the Island of Lipara, and found them  hammering away at a horse- trough for Poseidon. Brontes, who had been instructed to t
13 | Pa ge
make whatever she wanted, took her on his knee; but, disliking his endearments, she tore  a handful of hair from his chest, where a bald patch remained to the day of his death;  anyone might have supposed that he had the mange. The nymphs were terrified at the  wild appearance of the Cyclopes, and at the din of their smithy—well they might be, for  whenever a little girl is disobedient her mother threatens her with Brontes, Arges, or  Steropes. But Artemis boldly told them to abandon Poseidon’s trough for a while, and  make her a silver bow, with a quiverful of arrows, in return for which they should eat the  first prey she brought down. With these weapons she went to Arcadia, where Pan was  engaged in cutting up a lynx to feed his bitches and their whelps. He gave her three lop 
cared hounds, two patti-coloured and one spotted, together capable of dragging live  lions back to their kennels; and seven swift hounds from Sparta.  
 Having captured alive two couple of horned hinds, she harnessed them to a golden  chariot with golden bits, and drove north over Thracian Mount Haemus. She cut her first  pine torch on Mysian Olympus, and lit it at the cinders of a lightning-struck tree. She  tried her silver bow four times: her first two targets were trees; her third, a wild beast; her  fourth, a city of unjust men.  
Then she returned to Greece, where the Amnisian nymphs unyoked her hinds,  rubbed them down, fed them on the same quick growing trefoil, from Hera’s pasture,  which the steeds of Zeus eat, and watered them from golden trough.  
Once the River-god Alpheius, son of Thetis, dared fall in love with Artemis and  pursue her across Greece; but she came to Letrini in Elis (or, some say, as far as the  island of Ortygia near Syracuse), where she daubed her face, and those of all her nymphs,  with white mud, so that she became indistinguishable from the rest of the company.  Alpheius was forced to retire, pursued by mocking laughter.  
Artemis requires the same perfect chastity from her companions as she practises  herself. When Zeus had seduced one of them, Callisto, daughter of Lycaon, Artemis  noticed that she was with child. Changing her into a bear, she shouted to the pack, and  Callisto would have been hunted to death had she not been caught up to Heaven by Zeus  who, later, set her image among the stars. But some say that Zeus himself changed  Callisto into a bear, and that jealous Hera arranged for Artemis to chase her in error.  Callisto’s child, Arcas, was saved, and became the ancestor of the Arcadians.  
 On another occasion, Actaeon, son of Aristaeus, stood leaning against a rock near  Orchomenum when he happened to see Artemis bathing in a stream not far off, and  stayed to watch. Lest he should afterwards dare boast to his companions that she had  displayed herself naked in his presence, she changed him into a stag and, with his own  pack of fifty hounds, tore him to pieces.  
HEPHAESTUS’ NATURE AND DEEDS 
HEPHAESTUS, the Smith-god, was so weakly at birth that his disgusted mother, Hera,  dropped him from the height of Olympus, to rid herself of the embarrassment that his  pitiful appearance caused her. He survived this misadventure, however, without bodily  damage, because he fell into the sea, where Thetis and Eurynome were at hand to rescue  him. These gentle goddesses kept him with them in an underwater grotto, where he set up  his first smithy and rewarded their kindness by making them all sorts of ornamental and  useful objects.  
One day, when nine years had passed, Hera met Thetis, who happened to be  wearing a brooch of his workmanship, and asked: ‘My dear, where in the world did you  find that wonderful jewel?’ Thetis hesitated before replying, but Hera forced the truth  from her. At once she fetched Hephaestus back to Olympus, where she set him upon a 
14 | Pa ge
much finer smithy, with twenty bellows working day and night, made much of him, and  arranged that he should marry Aphrodite.  
Hephaestus became so far reconciled with Hera that he dared reproach Zeus  himself for hanging her by the wrists from Heaven when she rebelled against him. But  silence would have been wiser, because angry Zeus only heaved him down from  Olympus a second time. He was a whole day failing. On striking the earth of the island of  Lemnos, he broke both legs and, though immortal, had little life left in his body when the  islanders found him. Afterwards pardoned and restored to Olympus, he could walk only  with golden leg-supports.  
Hephaestus is ugly and ill-tempered, but has great power in his arms and shoulders,  and all his work is of matchless skill. He once made a set of golden mechanical women to  help him in his smithy; they can even talk, and undertake the most difficult tasks he  entrusts to them. And he owns a set of three-legged tables with golden wheels, ranged  around his workshop, which can run by themselves to a meeting of the gods, and back  again.  
DEMETER’S NATURE AND DEEDS 
THOUGH the priestesses of Demeter, goddess of the cornfield, initiate brides and  bridegrooms into the secrets of the couch, she has no husband of her own. While still  young and gay, she bore Core and the lusty Iacchus to Zeus, her brother, out of wedlock.  She also bore Plutus to the Titan Iasius, or Iasion, with whom she fell in love at the  wedding of Cadmus and Harmonia. Inflamed by the nectar which flowed like water at the  feast, the lovers slipped out of the house and lay together openly in a thrice-ploughed  field. On their return, Zeus guessing from their demeanour and the mud on their arms and  legs what they had been at, and enraged that Iasius should have dared to touch Demeter,  struck him dead with a thunderbolt. But some say that Iasius was killed by his brother  Dardanus, or torn to pieces by his own horses.  
 Demeter herself has a gentle soul, and Erysichthon, son of Tropias, was one of the  few men with whom she ever dealt harshly. At the head of twenty companions,  Erysichthon dared invade a grove which the Pelasgians had planted for her at Dotium,  and began cutting down the sacred trees, to provide timber for his new banqueting hall.  Demeter assumed the form of Nicippe, priestess of the grove, and mildly ordered  Erysichthon to desist. It was only when he threatened her with his axe that she revealed  herself in splendour and condemned him to suffer perpetual hunger, however much he  might eat. Back he went to dinner, and gorged all day at his parents' expense, growing  hungrier and thinner the more he ate, until they could no longer afford to keep him  supplied with food, and he became a beggar in the streets, eating frith. Contrariwise, on  Pandareus the Cretan, who stole Zeus's golden dog and thus avenged her for the killing of  Iasius, Demeter bestowed the royal gift of never suffering from the bellyache.  
 Demeter lost her gaiety forever when young Core, afterwards called Persephone,  was taken from her. Hades fell in love with Core, and went to ask Zeus's leave to marry  her. Zeus feared to offend his eldest brother by a downright refusal, but knew also that  Demeter would not forgive him if Core were committed to Tartarus; he therefore  answered politically that he could neither give nor withhold his consent. This  emboldened Hades to abduct the girl, as she was picking flowers in a meadow — it may  have been at Sicilian Enna; or at Attic Colonus; or at Hermione; or somewhere in Crete, 
15 | Pa ge
or near Pisa, or near Lerna; or beside Arcadian Pheneus, or at Boeotian Nysa, or  anywhere else in the widely separated regions which Demeter visited in her wandering  search for Core. But her own priests say that it was at Eleusis. She sought Core without  rest for nine days and nights, neither eating nor drinking, and calling fruitlessly all the  while. The only news she could get came from old Hecate, who early one morning had  heard Core crying ‘A rape! A rape!' but, on hurrying to the rescue, found no sign of her.  
On the tenth day, after a disagreeable encounter with Poseidon among the herds of  Oneus, Demeter came in disguise to Eleusis, where King Celeus and his wife Metaneira  entertained her hospitably; and she was invited to remain as wetnurse to Demophoön, the  newly—born prince. Their lame daughter Iambe tried to console Demeter with comically  lascivious verses, and the drynurse, old Baubo, persuaded her to drink barleywater by a  jest: she groaned as if in travail and, unexpectedly, produced from beneath her skirt  Demeter’s own son Iaachus, who leaped into his mother’s arms and kissed her.  
 ‘Oh, how greedily you drink!’ cried Abas, an elder son of Celeus’s, as Demeter  gulped the pitcherful of barleywater, which was flavoured with mint. Demeter threw him  a grim look, and he was metamorphosed into a lizard. Somewhat ashamed of herself,  Demeter now decided to do Celeus a service, by making Demophoön immortal. That  night she held him over the fire, to burn away his mortality. Metaneira, who was the  daughter of Amphicyon, happened to enter the hall before the process was complete, and  broke the spell; so Demophoön died. ‘Mine is an unlucky house!’ Celeus complained,  weeping at the fate of his two sons, and thereafter was called Dysaules, ‘Dry your tears,  Dysaules,’ said Demeter, ‘You will have three sons, including Triptolemus on whom I  intend to confer such great gifts that you will forget your double loss.’  
 For Triptolemus who herded his father’s cattle, had recognized Demeter and given  her the news she needed: ten days before this his brothers Eumolpus, a shepherd, and  Eubuleus, a swineherd, had been out in the fields, feeding their beasts, when the earth  suddenly gaped open, engulfing Eubuleus’s swine before his very eyes; then, with a  heavy thud of hooves, a chariot drawn by black horses appeared, and dashed down the  chasm. The chariot—driver’s face was invisible, but his right arm was tightly clasped  around a shrieking girl. Eumolpus had been told of the event by Eubuleus, and made it  the subject for a lament.  
 Armed with this evidence, Demeter summoned Hecate. Together they approached  Helius, who sees everything, and forced him to admit that Hades had been the villain,  doubtless with the connivance of his brother Zeus. Demeter was so angry that, instead of  returning to Olympus, she continued to wander about the earth, forbidding the trees to  yield fruit and the herbs to grow, until the race of men stood in danger of extinction.  Zeus, ashamed to visit Demeter in person at Eleusis, sent her first a message by Iris (of  which she took no notice), and then a deputation of the Olympian gods, with conciliatory  gifts, begging her to be reconciled to his will. But she would not return to Olympus, and  swore that the earth must remain barren until Core had been restored.  
 Only one course of action remained for Zeus. He sent Hermes with a message to  Hades: ‘If you do not restore Core, we are all undone!’ and with another to Demeter:  ‘You may have your daughter again, on the single condition that she has not yet tasted  the food of the dead.’  
Because Core had refused to eat so much as a crust of bread ever since her  abduction, Hades was obliged to cloak his vexation, telling her mildly: ‘My child, you  seem to be unhappy here, and your mother weeps for you. I have therefore decided to  send you home.’  
Core’s tears ceased to flow, and Hermes helped her to mount his chariot, But, just  as she was setting off for Eleusis, one of Hades’ gardeners, by name Ascalaphus, began 
16 | Pa ge
to cry and hoot derisively. ‘Having seen the Lady Core,’ he said, ‘pick a pomegranate  from a tree in your orchard, and eat seven seeds, I am ready to bear witness that she has  tasted the food of the dead!’ Hades grinned, and told Ascalaphus to perch on the back of  Hermes’s chariot.  
At Eleusis, Demeter joyfully embraced Core; but, on hearing about the  pomegranate, grew more dejected than ever, and said again: ‘I will neither return to  Olympus, nor remove my curse from the land.’ Zeus then persuaded Rhea, the mother of  Hades, Demeter, and himself, to plead with her; and a compromise was at last reached.  Core should spend three months of the year in Hades’s company, as Queen of Tartarus,  with the title of Persephone, and the remaining nine in Demeter’s. Hecate offered to make  sure that this arrangement was kept, and to keep constant watch on Core.  
 Demeter finally consented to return home. Before leaving Eleusis, she instructed  Triptolemus, Eumolpus, and Celeus (together with Diocles, King of Pherae, who had  been assiduously searching for Core all the while) in her worship and mysteries. But she  punished Ascalaphus for his tale—bearing by pushing him down a hole and covering it  with an enormous rock, from which he was finally released by Heracles; and then she  changed him into a short—eared owl. She also rewarded the Pheneations of Arcadia, in  whose house she rested after Poseidon had outraged her, with all kinds of grain, but  forbade them to sow beans.  
One Cyamites was the first who dared do so; he has a shrine by the river Cephissus.  Triptolemus she supplied with seedcorn, a wooden plough, and a chariot drawn by  serpents; and sent him all over the world to teach mankind the art of agriculture. But first  she gave him lessons on the Rarian Plain, which is why some call him the son of King  Rarus. And to Phytalus, who had treated her kindly on the banks of the Cephissus, she  gave a figtree, the first ever seen in Attica, and taught him how to cultivate it.  
ATHENA’S NATURE AND DEEDS 
ATHENE invented the flute, the trumpet, the earthenware pot, the plough, the rake,  the oxyoke, the horsebridle, the chariot, and the ship. She first taught the science of  numbers, and all women's arts, such as cooking, weaving, and spinning. Although a  goddess of war, she gets no pleasure from battle, as Ares and Eris do, but rather from  settling disputes, and upholding the law by pacific means. She bears no arms in time of  peace and, if ever she needs any, will usually borrow a set from Zeus. Her mercy is great:  when the judges' votes are equal in a criminal trial at Areiopagus, she always gives a  casting vote to liberate the accused. Yet, once engaged in battle, she never loses the day,  even against Ares himself, being better grounded in tactics and strategy than he; and wise  captains always approach her for advice.  
Many gods, Titans, and giants would gladly have married Athene, but she has  repulsed all advances. On one occasion, in course of the Trojan War, not wishing to  borrow arms from Zeus, who had declared himself neutral, she asked Hephaestus to make  her a set of her own. Hephaestus refused payment, saying coyly that he will undertake the  work for love; and when, missing the implication these words, she entered the smithy to  watch him beat out the red-hot metal, he suddenly turned about and tried to outrage her.  Hephaestus, who does not often behave so grossly, was the victim of a malicious joke:  Poseidon had just informed him that Athene was on her way to the smithy, with Zeus’s  consent, hopefully expecting to have violent love made to her. As she tore herself away,  Hephaestus ejaculated against her thigh, a little above the knee. She wiped off the seed  with a handful of wool, which she threw away in disgust; it fell to the ground near  Athens, and accidentally fertilized Mother Earth, who was on a visit them. Revolted at 
17 | Pa ge
the prospect of bearing a child which Hephaestus had tried to father on Athene, Mother  Earth declared that she would accept no responsibility for its upbringing.  ‘Very well,’ said Athene, ‘I will take care of it myself.’ So she took charge of the  infant as soon as he was born, called him Erichthonius and, not wishing Poseidon to  laugh at the success of his practical joke, hid him in a sacred basket; this she gave to  Aglauros, eldest daughter of the Athenian King Cecrops, with orders to guard it carefully.  Cecrops, a son of Mother Earth and, like Erichthonius - whom some suppose to  have been his father - part man, part serpent, was the first king to recognize paternity. He  married a daughter of Actaeus, the earliest King of Attica. He also instituted monogamy,  divided Attica into twelve communities, built temples to Athene, and abolished certain  bloody sacrifices in favor of sober barley—cake offerings. His wife was named Agraulos;  and his three daughters, Aglauros, Herse, and Pandrosos, lived in a three-roomed house  on the Acropolis. One evening, when the girls had returned from a festival, carrying  Athene’s sacred baskets on their heads, Hermes bribed Aglauros to give him access to  Herse, the youngest of the three, with whom he had fallen violently in love. Aglauros  kept Hermes’s gold, but did nothing to earn it, because Athene had made her jealous of  Herse’s good fortune; so Hermes strode angrily into the house, turned Aglauros to stone,  and had his will of Herse. After Herse had borne Hermes two sons, Cephalus, the beloved  of Eos, and Ceryx, the first herald of the Eleusinian Mysteries, she and Pandrosos and  their mother Agraulos were curious enough to peep beneath the lid of the basket which  Aglauros had cradled. Seeing a child with a serpent’s tail for legs, they screamed in fear  and, headed by Agraulos, leaped from the Acropolis.  
On learning of this fatality, Athene was so grieved that she let fall the enormous  rock which she had been carrying to the Acropolis as an additional fortification, and it  became Mount Lycabettus. As for the crow that had brought her the news, she changed  its colour from white to black, and forbade all crows ever again to visit the Acropolis.  Erichthonius then took refuge in Athene’s aegis, where she reared him so tenderly that  some mistook her for his mother. Later, he became King of Athens, where he instituted  the worship of Athene, and taught his fellow-citizens the use of silver. His image was set  among the stars as the constellation Auriga, since he had introduced the four-horse  chariot.  
Another, very different, account of Agraulos’s death is current: namely that once,  when an assault was being launched against Athens, she threw herself from the  Acropolis, in obedience to an oracle, and so saved the day. This version purports to  explain why all young Athenians, on first taking up arms, visit the temple of Agraulos  and there dedicate their lives to the city.  
Athene, though as modest as Artemis, is far more generous. When Teiresias, one  day, accidentally surprised her in a bath, she laid her hands over his eyes and blinded  him, but gave him inward sight by way of a compensation.  
She is not recorded to have shown petulant jealousy on more than a single  occasion. This is the story. Arachne, a princess of Lydian Colophon—famed for its  purple dye—was so akilled in the art of weaving that Athene herself could not compete  with her. Shown a cloth into which Arachne had woven illustrations of Olympian love  affairs, the goddess searched closely to find a fault but, unable to do so, tore it up in a  cold, vengeful rage. When the terrified Arachne hanged herself from a rafter, Athene  turned her into a spider—the insect she hates most—and the rope into a cobweb, up  which Arachne climbed to safety.  
DIONYSUS’ NATURE AND DEEDS
18 | Pa ge
ON Hera’s orders the Titans seized Zeus’s newly-born son Dionysus, a horned child  crowned with serpents and, despite his transformations, tore him into shreds. These they  boiled in a cauldron, while a pomegranate sprouted from the soil where his blood had  fallen; but, rescued and reconstituted by his grandmother Rhea, he came to life again.  Persephone, now entrusted with his charge by Zeus, brought him to King Athamas of  Orchomenus and his wife Ino, whom she persuaded to rear the child in the women’s  quarters, disguised as a girl. But Hera could not be deceived, and punished the royal pair  with madness, so that Athamas killed their son Learchus, mistaking him for a stag.  
Then, on Zeus’s instructions, Hermes temporarily transformed Dionysus into a kid  or a ram, and presented him to the nymphs Macris, Nysa, Erato, Bromia, and Bacche, of  Heliconian Mount Nysa. They tended Dionysus in a cave, cosseted him, and fed him on  honey, for which service Zeus subsequently placed their images among the stars, naming  them the Hyades. It was on Mount Nysa that Dionysus invented wine, for which he is  chiefly celebrated. When he grew to manhood Hera recognized him as Zeus’s son,  despite the effeminacy to which his education had reduced him, and drove him mad also.  He went wandering all over the world, accompanied by his tutor Silenus and a wild army  of Satyrs and Maenads, whose weapons were the ivy-twined staff tipped with a pine cone, called the thyrsus, and swords and serpents and fear-imposing bullroarers. He  sailed to Egypt, bringing the vine with him; and at Pharos King Proteus received him  hospitably. Among the Libyans of the Nile Delta, opposite Pharos, were certain Amazon  queens whom Dionysus invited to march with him against the Titans and restore King  Ammon to the kingdom from which he had been expelled. Dionysus’s defeat of the  Titans and restoration of King Ammon was the earliest of his many military successes.  
He then turned east and made for India. Coming to the Euphrates, he was opposed  by the King of Damascus, whom he flayed alive, but built a bridge across the river with  ivy and vine; after which a tiger, sent by his father Zeus, helped him across the river  Tigris. He reached India, having met with much opposition by the way, and conquered  the whole country, which he taught the art of viniculture, also giving it laws and founding  great cities.  
On his return he was opposed by the Amazons, a horde of whom he chased as far  as Ephesus. A few took sanctuary in the Temple of Artemis, where their descendants are  still living; others fled to Samos, and Dionysus followed them in boats, killing so many  that the battlefield is called Panhaema. Near Phloecus some of the elephants which he  had brought from India died, and their bones are still pointed out.  
Next, Dionysus returned to Europe by way of Phrygia, where his grandmother  Rhea purified him of the many murders he had committed during his madness, and  initiated him into her Mysteries. He then invaded Thrace; but no sooner had his people  landed at the mouth of the river Strymon than Lycurgus, King of the Edonians, opposed  them savagely with an ox-goad, and captured the entire army, except Dionysus himself,  who plunged into the sea and took refuge in Thetis’s grotto. Rhea, vexed by this reverse,  helped the prisoners to escape, and drove Lycurgus mad: he struck his own son Dryas  dead with an axe, in the belief that he was cutting down a vine. Before recovering his  senses he had begun to prune the corpse of its nose and ears, fingers and toes; and the  whole land of Thrace grew barren in horror of his crime. When Dionysus, returning from  the sea, announced that this barrenness would continue unless Lycurgus were put to  death, the Edonians led him to Mount Pangaeum, where wild horses pulled his body  apart.  
Dionysus met with no further opposition in Thrace, but travelled on to his well beloved Boeotia, where he visited Thebes, and invited the women to join his revels on  Mount Cithaeron. Pentheus, King of Thebes, disliking Dionysus’s dissolute appearance, 
19 | Pa ge
arrested him, together with all his Maenads, but went mad and, instead of shackling  Dionysus, shackled a bull. The Maenads escaped again, and went raging out upon the  mountain, where they tore calves in pieces. Pentheus attempted to stop them; but,  inflamed by wine and religious ecstasy, they rent him limb from limb. His mother Agave  led the riot, and it was she who wrenched off his head.  
At Orchomenus the three daughters of Minyas, by name Alcithoë, Leucippe, and  Arsippe, or Aristippe, or Arsinoë, refused to join in the revels, though Dionysus himself  invited them, appearing in the form of a girl. He then changed his shape, becoming  successively a lion, a bull, and a panther, and drove them insane. Leucippe offered her  own son Hippasus as a sacrifice—he had been chosen by lot—and the three sisters,  having torn him to pieces and devoured him, skimmed the mountains in a frenzy until at  last Hermes changed them into birds, though some say that Dionysus changed them into  bats. The murder of Hippasus is annually atoned at Orchomenus, in a feast called  Agrionia (‘provocation to savagery’), when the women devotees pretend to seek  Dionysus and then, having agreed that he must be away with the Muses, sit in a circle and  ask riddles, until the priest of Dionysus rushes from his temple, with a sword, and kills  the one whom he fit catches.  
When all Boeotia had acknowledged Dionysus’s divinity, he made a tour of the  Aegean Islands, spreading joy and terror wherever he went. Arriving at Icaria, he found  that his ship was unseaworth and hired another from certain Tyrrhenian sailors who  claimed to be bound for Naxos. But they proved to be pirates and, unaware of godhead,  steered for Asia, intending to sell him there as a slave. Dionysus made a vine grow from  the deck and enfold the mast, he also turned the oars into serpents, and became a lion  himself, filling the vessel with phantom beasts and filling it with sound of flutes, so that  the terrified pirates leaped overboard and became dolphins.  
It was at Naxos that Dionysus met the lovely Ariadne whom Theseus had deserted,  and married her without delay. She bore him Oenopion, Thoas, Staphylus, Latromis,  Euanthes, and Tauropolus. Later, he placed her bridal chaplet among the stars.  
From Naxos he came to Argos and punished Perseus, who at fought opposed him  and killed many of his followers, by inflicting a madness on the Argive women: they  began devouring their own infants; until Perseus hastily admitted his error, and appeased  Dionysus by building a temple in his honour.  
 Finally, having established his worship throughout the world Dionysus ascended to  Heaven, and now sits at the right hand of Zeus as one of the Twelve Great Ones. The  self- effacing goddess Hest resigned her seat at the high table in his favour; glad of any  excuse to escape the jealous wranglings of her family, and knowing that she could always  count on a quiet welcome in any Greek city which might please her to visit. Dionysus  then descended, by way of Leto to Tartarus where he bribed Persephone with a gift of  myrtle to release his dead mother, Semele. She ascended with him into Artemis’s temple  at Troezen; but, lest other ghosts should be jealous and aggrieved, he changed her name  and introduced her to his fellow-Olympians as Thyone. Zeus placed an apartment at her  disposal, and Hera preserved an angry but resigned silence.  
THE GODS OF THE UNDERWORLD 
WHEN ghosts descend to Tartarus, the main entrance to which lies in a grove of  black  
poplars beside the Ocean stream, each is supplied by pious relatives with a coin  laid under the tongue of its corpse. They are thus able to pay Charon, the miser  who ferries them in a crazy boat across the Styx. This hateful river bounds 
20 | Pa ge
Tartarus on the western side, and has for its tributaries Acheron, Phlegethon,  Cocytus, Aornis, and Lethe. Penniless ghosts must wait forever on the near  bank; unless they have evaded Hermes, their conductor, and crept down by a  back entrance, such as at Laconian Taenarus, or Thesprotian Aornum. A three 
headed or, some say, fifty-headed dog named Cerberus; guards the opposite  shore of Styx, ready to devour living intruders or ghostly fugitives.  The first region of Tartarus contains the cheerless Asphodel Fields, where  souls of  
heroes stray without purpose among the throngs of less distinguished dead that  twitter like bats, and where only Orion still has the heart to hunt the ghostly deer.  None of them but would rather live in bondage to a landless peasant than rule  over all Tartarus. Their one delight is in libations of blood poured to them by the  living: when they drink they feel themselves almost men again. Beyond these  meadows lie Erebus and the palace of Hades and Persephone. To the left of the  palace, as one approaches it, a white cypress shades the pool of Lethe, where  the common ghosts flock down to drink. Initiated souls avoid this water, choosing  to drink instead from the pool of Memory, shaded by a white poplar [?], which  gives them a certain advantage over their fellows. Close by, newly arrived ghosts  are daily judged by Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Aeacus at a place where three  roads meet. Rhadamanthys tries Asiatics and Aeacus tries Europeans; but both  refer the difficult cases to Minos. As each verdict is given the ghosts are directed  along one of the three roads: that leading back to the Asphodel Meadows, if they  are neither virtuous nor evil; that leading to the punishment-field of Tartarus, if  they are evil; that leading to the orchards of Elysium, if they are virtuous.  
Elysium, ruled over by Cronus, lies near Hades’s dominions, its entrance  close to the pool of Memory, but forms no part of them; it is a happy land of  perpetual day, without cold or snow, where games, music, and revels never  cease, and where the inhabitants may elect to be reborn on earth whenever they  please. Near by are the Fortunate Islands, reserved for those who have been  three times born, and three times attained Elysium. But some say that there is  another Fortunate Isle called Leuce in the Black Sea, opposite the mouths of the  Danube, wooded and full of beasts, wild and tame, where the ghosts of Helen  and Achilles bold high revelry and declaim Homer’s verses to heroes who have  taken part in the events celebrated by him.  
Hades, who is fierce and jealous of his rights, seldom visits the upper air,  except on  
business or when he is overcome by sudden lust. Once he dazzled the Nymph  Minthe with the splendour of his golden chariot and its four black horses, and  would have seduced her without difficulty had not Queen Persephone made a  timely appearance and metamorphosed Minthe into sweet-smelling mint. On  another occasion Hades tried to violate the Nymph Leuce, who was similarly  metamorphosed into the white poplar standing by the pool of Memory. He  willingly allows none of his subjects to escape, and few who visit Tartarus return  alive to describe it, which makes him the most hated of the gods.  
Hades never knows what is happening in the world above, or in Olympus,  except for fragmentary information which comes to him when mortals strike their  hands upon the earth and invoke him with oaths and curses. His most prized  possession is the helmet of invisibility, given him as a mark of gratitude by the  Cyclopes when he consented to release them at Zeus’s order. All the riches of  gems and precious metals hidden beneath the earth are his, but he owns no 
21 | Pa ge
property above ground, except for certain gloomy temples in Greece and,  possibly, a herd of cattle in the island of Erytheia which, some say, really belong  to Helius.  
Queen Persephone, however, can be both gracious and merciful. She is  faithful to Hades, but has had no children by him and prefers the company of  Hecate, goddess of witches, to his. Zeus himself honours Hecate so greatly that  he never denies her the ancient power which she has always enjoyed: of  bestowing on mortals, or withholding from them, any desired gift. She has three  bodies and three heads—lion, dog, and mare.  
Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megaera, the Erinnyes or Furies, live in Erebus, and  are older than Zeus or any of the other Olympians. Their task is to hear  complaints brought by mortals against the insolence of the young to the aged, of  children to parents, of hosts to guests, and of householders or city councils to  suppliants—and to punish such crimes by hounding the culprits relentlessly,  without rest or pause, from city to city and from country to country. These  Erinnyes are crones, with snakes for hair, dogs’ heads, coal-black bodies, bats’  wings, and bloodshot eyes. In their hands they carry brass-studded scourges,  and their victims die in torment. It is unwise to mention them by name in  conversation; hence they are usually styled the Eumenides, which means ‘The  Kindly Ones’—as Hades is styled Pluton, or Pluto, ‘The Rich One’. 
22 | Pa ge
